CORONERS ACT, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 

SOUTH 

AUSTRALIA 

 
 
 
FINDING OF INQUEST 

 

 

An Inquest taken on behalf of our Sovereign Lady the Queen at Adelaide 

 

 
 

in the State of South Australia, on the 11th, 12th and 13th days of May 2016 and the 25th day of 

November 2016, by the Coroner’s Court of the said State, constituted of  Mark Frederick Johns, 

State Coroner, into the death of Bailey Trent Richard Milera-Ashford. 

The said Court finds that Bailey Trent Richard Milera-Ashford aged 20 

months,  late  of  44  Brunswick  Street,  Kilburn,  South  Australia  died  at  the  Women's  and 

Children's Hospital, 72 King William Road, North Adelaide, South Australia on the 12th day of 

July 2013 as a result of myocarditis.  The said Court finds that the circumstances of his death 

were as follows:  

1. 

Introduction and cause of death 

1.1.  Bailey  Trent  Richard Milera-Ashford  was  20  months  old  at  the  time  of  his  death  on 

12 July  2013.    An  autopsy  was  performed  by  Professor  Roger  Byard  of  Forensic 

Science South Australia and he prepared a report1 in which he gave the cause of death 

as myocarditis. 

2. 

Background 

2.1.  Bailey’s  mother  took  him  to  the  Prospect  Medical  Centre  for  his  18  month 

immunisations  on  1  July  2013.    He  was  seen  by  Dr Williams,  a  general  practitioner, 

and his immunisations were given that day as planned.  At the time of the consultation 

Dr Williams noted that Bailey had a mild cold with symptoms that were not significant 

enough to deter the process of immunisation2.  Dr Williams could not have known that 

                                                           
1 Exhibit C2a 
2 Transcript, page 101 

 

 

2 

the  virus  that  was  causing  Bailey’s  cold,  and  which  continued  to  develop  in  the 

following 12 days, would bring about the myocarditis which ultimately caused Bailey’s 

death.  However, in my opinion the viral symptoms that were evident on that day were 

the early stages of the virus that developed into myocarditis, and I so find.    

2.2. 

In  the  days  following  Bailey’s  immunisation  his  symptoms  became  worse  and  his 

mother brought him back to see Dr Williams on 7 July 2013.   

2.3.  Bailey’s mother said that she was concerned because Bailey did not seem to be getting 

any better, that he was clingy and  that he had what she described as a  ‘pigeon chest’ 3.  

She explained that she thought that Bailey’s chest was ‘pushed out’4 and hence her use 

of  the  expression  ‘pigeon  chested’.    She  was  also  concerned  because  Bailey  had  not 

been  eating  solids5.    Bailey  remained  in  his  mother’s  arms  for  the  consultation, 

including Dr Williams’ examination of Bailey.  His mother described Dr Williams’ use 

of  the  stethoscope and his examination of Bailey’s  throat and ears 6.   She  said  that her 

understanding  of  Dr Williams’  assessment  of  Bailey  was  that  he  had  tonsillitis  and  a 

viral  infection and was  to have antibiotics and  to maintain his  fluids, but  that he gave 

her  no  other  advice.    In  particular,  Bailey’s mother  said  that Dr Williams  did  not  tell 

her to take Bailey to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital if he got any worse7. 

2.4.  Bailey’s mother  said  that  she  administered  the  antibiotics  to Bailey  as  directed  in  the 

ensuing  days,  but  he  did  not  appear  to  get  any  better  and  so  she  took  him  back  to 

Dr Williams on 10 July 20138.  She said that during that three days Bailey’s clinginess 

had  become  worse,  he  was  not  eating,  he  was  flat,  did  not  walk  and  did  not  want  to 

play9.  She thought he was worse.  Bailey’s mother said that as a mother she knew that 

there  was  ‘just  something  wrong’10.    She  said  that  she  had  also  noticed  that  both  of 

Bailey’s feet were swollen and she mentioned this  to  the doctor at  the consultation on 

10 July 201311.   

2.5.  Bailey’s mother described the consultation on 10 July 2013.  She said that Bailey would 

not  get  out  of  her  arms,  even  for  the  consultation with Dr Williams  and  by  that  stage 

                                                           
3 Transcript, page 16 
4 Transcript, page 15 
5 Transcript, page 17 
6 Transcript, page 19 
7 Transcript, page 20 
8 Transcript, page 21 
9 Transcript, page 22 
10 Transcript, page 24 
11 Transcript, page 25 

3 

she was exhausted because she had three other children to take care as well and she was 

never getting any rest12.  She informed Dr Williams of these things13.  Bailey’s mother 

also  told  Dr Williams  that  she  did  not  think  the  antibiotics  were  working  and  she 

commented  again  about  Bailey’s  ‘pigeony’  chest14.    She  said  that  Dr Williams  when 

examining  Bailey  with  the  stethoscope  asked  her  if  he  had  been  born  with  a  heart 

murmur and she responded no.  She told Dr Williams that Bailey had been having steam 

showers  to assist with his breathing over  the  last  several days 15.   Bailey’s mother  said 

that  she was  aware  that Dr Williams was going  to  be  away on holidays  from  that day 

and that he gave her the contact details of another doctor at the clinic16. 

2.6.  Dr Williams’ progress notes for the consultations on 7 July 2013 and 10 July 2013 were 

as follows. 

'7 July 2013 - Consultation notes 

Had 18/12 vaccination on 1/7/13 

Been unwell generally for last 1/52 + 

 brought in today as appears to be worsening (increase in inspiratory effort) 

Oral fluids down 

O/E: Alert but quiet 

Pale + 

Hydration down 

Ears – dull erthema of both drums/ full ++ 

Nose – n 

Throat – n 

Chest – reduced aE to bases with bibasal coarse creps ++ 

Noted tachypnoeic ++ using accessory muscle of chest ++ 

DDx:  LRTI 

P: Start Rx for bact – EES 240mg bd 

Increase oral fluids ++ 

To watch closely any deteriorating  If so attend Emerg WCH 

R/v otherwise in 3/7' 

 

 

                                                           
12 Transcript, page 27 
13 Transcript, page 28 
14 Transcript, page 29 
15 Transcript, page 29 
16 Transcript, page 32 

4 

The consultation notes for 10 July 2013 were as follows: 

'10 July 2013 - Consultation notes 

Been on EES last 3/7 

- somewhat better in self 

Some vomiting bouts.  Still quite active and drinking milk but not other solids. 

Examination Notes 

Vital signs 

Weight = 10.3kg 

Alert still but quiet 

Hydration – still OK 

HS dual – noted ejection systolic murmur?? New – to lx further when better 

Chest – good ae today, clear! 

Assessment Notes 

Increase oral fluids ++  rest +/- panadol 

Cont with EES for now 

RTI / bronchitis – resolving  Onset date:  10/07/2013' 

2.7.  Dr Williams was asked about where he obtained the impression on the consultation on 

10  July  2013  that  Bailey  was  somewhat  better  and  he  said  that  was  a  history  he 

ascertained from Bailey’s mother17.  This is at odds with the version given by Bailey’s 

mother  of  this  consultation.    It  is  notable  that Dr Williams  observed  that  Bailey’s  air 

entry was ‘clear’.  He said that the absence of crepitations that day was a little bit of a 

surprise  to  him, hence  the  exclamation mark, but  that he  regarded  this  as  a good  sign 

and  that  the  lower  respiratory  tract  was  now  responding18.    It  is  possible  that  this 

symptom was the reason for Dr Williams’ conclusion that Bailey was somewhat better 

as  distinct  from  anything  said  by  Bailey’s  mother.    Certainly  her  evidence  was 

inconsistent with the idea that she would have said anything to that effect. 

2.8.  Dr Williams was asked about his notation about an ejection systolic murmur.  He said 

this could indicate a number of things, some of which were not necessarily sinister.  He 

said he had not heard it before in Bailey and therefore made a point of mentioning it to 

Bailey’s mother and his intention was to investigate it further when Bailey was better19.   

                                                           
17 Transcript, page 56 
18 Transcript, page 60 
19 Transcript, page 58 

5 

2.9.  Dr Williams affirmed that he would not have noted that he told Bailey’s mother to take 

Bailey  to emergency at Women’s and Children’s Hospital  if  there  is any deterioration 

unless he had actually said that to her20.   

2.10.  Dr Williams  said  that  he  did  not  note  signs  in  Bailey  that  he  would  regard  as  being 

consistent with pigeon chestedness21. 

2.11.  Dr Williams  said  that  he  examined  Bailey’s  ankles  for  signs  of  swelling  and  did  not 

think that they were swollen22. 

3. 

Expert opinion 

3.1.  Dr Joyner 

Dr Peter Joyner provided an expert report in this matter.  He also gave evidence at the 

Inquest.  It was Dr Joyner’s opinion that on 7 July 2013 Dr Williams should have sent 

Bailey  to  the  Women’s  and  Children’s  Hospital  for  a  proper  assessment  of  his 

condition.  He said that in his opinion the respiratory distress being exhibited by Bailey 

on that occasion was in the moderate to severe category as evidenced by Dr  Williams’ 

examination notes.    It  is  that  factor which  in Dr Joyner’s opinion  required  that Bailey 

should be sent to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital.  He said that if the respiratory 

distress  had  only  been  mild  he  would  have  accepted  the  appropriateness  of  merely 

prescribing antibiotics23.   

3.2.  Dr Joyner said  that  in his opinion  it was not adequate for Dr Williams  to have  left  the 

decision to attend the Women’s and Children’s Hospital if Bailey’s condition worsened 

to his mother.   Dr Joyner noted that  it was obvious from  the material he had seen  that 

Bailey’s mother was very capable and that was certainly the assessment of Dr Williams 

too.  However, Dr Joyner regarded it as inappropriate to leave this decision to Bailey’s 

mother.  He pointed out that it was really a matter of communication and that the general 

instruction to attend the Women’s and Children’s Hospital if he deteriorated or became 

worse  begs  the  question  of  ‘worse  in what  respect?’.   Dr Joyner was  of  the  view  that 

highly  specific directions would need  to  be  given with  objective  criteria.   He  gave  as 

an example that one might say to a parent that the child’s respiration rate is now 40 per 

minute and that if they go to 50 per minute or more, the child should be taken to hospital.  

                                                           
20 Transcript, page 70 
21 Transcript, page 73 
22 Transcript, page 77 
23 Transcript, page 109 

6 

This  would  also  require  that  the  parent  be  shown  how  properly  to  count  the  child’s 

respiration  rate.    Dr Joyner  noted  that  it  is  common  for  doctors  to  give  the  advice  to 

take  a  child  to  hospital  if  they  deteriorate,  but  that  this  is  sometimes  a  throw  away 

comment  based  on  an  assumption  by  doctors  that  parents  will  pick  up  on  the  same 

symptoms that the doctors themselves would24.  Dr Joyner said that if the child was so 

vulnerable that any slight deterioration would mandate going to hospital, then the case 

would  be  that  the  child  ought  to  go  immediately  at  the  instigation  of  the  doctor25.  

Dr Joyner also said that the important thing is what Bailey’s mother understood she was 

being told.  While there was a dispute between Bailey’s mother and Dr Williams as to 

whether  Dr Williams  said  anything  at  all  about  the  referral  to  the  Women’s  and 

Children’s Hospital, what is plain is that as a matter of fact Bailey’s mother did not get 

that  message.    It  also  follows  that  she  did  not  get  any  message  about  the  signs  and 

symptoms  or objective  criteria  to  look  for  in making  a decision  about whether Bailey 

should  be  taken  to  the  Women’s  and  Children’s  Hospital.    In  other  words,  the 

communication  was  not  successful  on  any  view.    It  is  significant  that  in  general  the 

recollections  of  mother  and  doctor  as  to  what  was  conveyed  by  way  of  history 

corresponded.    Therefore,  it  is  not  as  though  there were  other  notable  areas  in which 

mother and doctor were unable to communicate.   This  is  the principal area  in which a 

failure  occurred.    Essentially  it  was  Dr Joyner’s  opinion  that  Dr Williams  himself 

should have sent Bailey to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital from the consultation 

on 7 July 2013.  He said that had this occurred Bailey would almost certainly have been 

given  an X-ray which would  very  likely  have  revealed  that  he  had  an  enlarged  heart.  

This would have led to treatment for his myocarditis. 

3.3.  Dr Joyner was asked about Dr Williams’ finding of an ejection systolic murmur when 

he saw Bailey on 10 July 2013.  Dr Joyner was of the view that this symptom of itself 

required  a  referral  to  the Women’s  and  Children’s  Hospital  for  assessment  where  an 

echocardiogram would almost certainly have been performed in a short space of time.  

Dr Joyner readily conceded that he did not think that Dr Williams should have deduced 

that the symptom represented a case of myocarditis with heart failure, but he was of the 

view that it did mandate a referral to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital immediately 

for investigation given the fact that Bailey had been unwell for some time26.  Dr Joyner 

                                                           
24 Transcript, page 111 
25 Transcript, page 111 
26 Transcript, page 116 

7 

was  of  the  view  that  Dr Williams,  who  discounted  Bailey’s  mother’s  reports  of  his 

symptoms of swollen feet, should in fact have placed more weight on her opinion27. 

3.4.  Dr Pearson 

Dr Christopher  Pearson  also  gave  evidence  at  the  Inquest.    He  is  a  specialist 

paediatrician  who  works  at  the Women’s  and  Children’s  Hospital.    Dr Pearson  gave 

evidence  that  if  Bailey  had  been  referred  by  Dr Williams  to  the  Women’s  and 

Children’s  Hospital  on  7 July  2013  he  would  initially  have  been  seen  by  one  of  the 

registrars  in  the  Emergency  Department.    Dr Pearson  said  that  with  increased 

respiratory effort and crackles in the chest the most common diagnosis would be chest 

infection, usually viral28.   He  also  noted  that  there  are other  causes  for  the  crackles  in 

the  chest,  including  heart  failure29.    He  said  that  Bailey  would  almost  certainly  have 

been  referred  for  a  chest  X-ray  and  said  that  if  it  had  not  already  been  clinically 

identified  that  the  heart  was  enlarged,  it would  have  been  obvious  on  the  X-ray30.    It 

was his view that had an X-ray taken place at that time it would have shown the enlarged 

heart based on the findings at autopsy31.  He said this finding on X-ray would have then 

triggered  a  referral  to  one  of  the  hospital’s  cardiologists  who  would  almost  certainly 

have  organised  an  echocardiogram  and  that  would  have  diagnosed  the  condition  of 

myocarditis32.    He  noted  that  the  treatment  for  that  condition  would  have  been 

commenced,  including  diuretics  and  drugs  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  pumping 

action  of  the  heart  and  to  reduce  the  resistance  of  the  flow  of  blood within  the  body.  

He said the prognosis for viral myocarditis in children Bailey’s age is that over 80% or 

probably even 90% are likely to survive.  He said that Bailey’s prognosis on 7 or 8 July 

2013 would have been excellent33.   

3.5. 

In relation to the consultation by Dr Williams on 10 July 2013, Dr Pearson said that the 

new  symptom  noted  by  Dr Williams  of  an  ejection  systolic  murmur  together  with 

Bailey’s  mother’s  concerns  about  swollen  feet  would,  amongst  the  clinicians  at  the 

Women’s and Children’s Hospital, have raised the immediate suspicion that there was 

a  cardiac  cause  for  these  symptoms34.    He  said  that  the  result  would  have  been 

                                                           
27 Transcript, page 120 
28 Transcript, page 145 
29 Transcript, page 146 
30 Transcript, page 146 
31 Transcript, page 147 
32 Transcript, page 147 
33 Transcript, page 148 
34 Transcript, page 149 

8 

examination  by  a  cardiologist  and  that  the  diagnosis  of myocarditis would  have  been 

made.    It  was  Dr Pearson’s  opinion  that  almost  certainly  intervention  to  treat  the 

myocarditis on 10 July 2013 would have produced a successful outcome for Bailey35.   

4. 

The  dispute  on  the  evidence  as  to  Dr Williams’s  advice  that  Bailey  should  be 

referred to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital if he deteriorated 

4.1.  The fact is that Dr Williams’ note of 7 July 2013 contained a record of advice ‘to watch 

closely any deterioration – if so to attend Emerg WCH’.  This clearly must be, and can 

only  be,  a  record  of  advice  that  he  gave  to  the  only  other  adult  present  in  the  room, 

namely Bailey’s mother.  I do not for a moment believe that Dr Williams fabricated this 

note.   Dr Williams presented as  an honest witness who made appropriate  concessions 

that  he  should  have  referred  Bailey  to  the Women’s  and  Children’s Hospital  on  both 

occasions as opined by Dr Joyner.   Furthermore,  there would have been no reason for 

Dr Williams to have fabricated that advice on 7 July 2013 when he at that point could 

not  have  appreciated,  and  clearly  did  not  appreciate,  the  seriousness  of  Bailey’s 

condition and the prospect of Bailey’s death only  five days later.   From this it follows 

that Dr Williams must have done that which he noted, namely to say words to that effect 

with the intention that Bailey’s mother would absorb the message as it was intended to 

be conveyed.  However Bailey’s mother did not absorb that message and it is possible 

that she may not even have properly heard it given the presence of a sick child who she 

had  been  describing  as  ‘clingy’  and  who  had  been  occupying  her  attention  for  some 

days because of his  sickness.    In  short, Bailey’s mother may not have been as alert  to 

whatever  Dr Williams  was  saying  as  Dr Williams  might  have  thought  she  was.  

However, Dr Williams most  certainly  should  have been  alive  to  that possibility.   The 

failure of communication in my opinion is a failure that must rest with Dr Williams and 

not with Bailey’s mother.  It is incumbent upon a doctor if placing responsibility of this 

kind upon a parent to ensure that the message is clearly conveyed and duly received.  It 

will be recalled that it was Dr Joyner’s opinion that even if it had been clearly conveyed 

and  duly  received  it  would  have  been  inappropriate  bearing  in  mind  the  fact  that  the 

person charged with responsibility, namely the parent, has other responsibilities to other 

children and has  to  look  after  themselves and gain  some  rest and  sleep  at  some point.  

                                                           
35 Transcript, page 150 

9 

It is therefore unrealistic to expect that they will be able to watch the child as closely as 

was needed in this case. 

5. 

Conclusions 

5.1. 

I  conclude  that Dr Williams  should  have  sent  Bailey  to  the Women’s  and  Children’s 

Hospital  for  specialist  review  on  7  July  2013.    Even  if  he  had  clearly  conveyed  to 

Bailey’s mother and she had understood the message that she was to take Bailey to the 

Women’s  and  Children’s  Hospital  in  the  event  of  deterioration,  this  was  an 

inappropriate direction.  This type of advice is fraught with risk, particularly in a mother 

who has other children to look after.  Furthermore, it would have been more helpful if 

Dr Williams’ observations of Bailey had been duly recorded in the notes rather than the 

more general records that he in fact made. 

5.2. 

I find that Bailey’s mother brought Bailey back to see Dr Williams on 10 July 2013 and 

she  was  concerned  about  his  swollen  feet  and  she  drew  this  to  the  attention  of 

Dr Williams.  Unfortunately this history was not recorded in Dr Williams’ consultation 

note and  it  should have been.   Dr Williams  seems  to have discounted  the significance 

of  this  symptom  and  that  is  particularly  unfortunate.    Dr Williams  did  not  place 

sufficient weight on the fact that the child’s mother was reporting that observation even 

if  he  himself  did  not  regard  Bailey’s  feet  as  being  particularly  swollen.    That 

observation  together with Dr Williams’ own  finding of  a heart murmur which he had 

not heard on any of  the previous  six occasions when he had  listened  to Bailey’s chest 

over  the  past  20 months  of Bailey’s  life,  taken  together with  the  fact  that  Bailey  had 

recently  been  unwell,  should  have  prompted  him  to  think  that  there  may  have  been 

something in what Bailey’s mother was saying as regards his swollen feet.  This should 

have been the tipping point for urgent specialist referral. 

5.3. 

I accept the evidence of Dr Pearson that had Bailey been referred to the Women’s and 

Children’s Hospital at any point between 7 and 10 July 2013 his condition would most 

likely  have  been  diagnosed,  firstly  through  a  simple  chest  X-ray  and  then  more 

definitely through an echocardiogram.  His prognosis would have been very good.  His 

death would certainly have been preventable at any time in that period.   

5.4.  Dr Williams  accepted  the  criticism  made  by  Dr Joyner  and  acknowledged  that  he 

should have referred Bailey to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital on both 7 July and 

10 July 2013.  That said, it must be acknowledged that myocarditis in a child Bailey’s 

10 

age is a rare presentation for a general practitioner and at least a third of presentations 

to general practitioners in Bailey’s age group will be for a chest infection.  It is therefore 

understandable that Dr Williams would be ‘detuned’.   

6. 

Recommendations 

6.1. 

Pursuant  to  Section  25(2)  of  the  Coroners  Act  2003  I  am  empowered  to  make 

recommendations  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  Court  might  prevent,  or  reduce  the 

likelihood of,  a  recurrence of  an  event  similar  to  the  event  that was  the  subject  of  the 

Inquest. 

6.2. 

I  recommend  that  the  Royal  Australian  College  of  General  Practitioners  and  the 

Australian  College  of  Rural  and  Remote  Medicine  should  issue  a  reminder  that  in 

paediatric  consultations  for  children  suffering  respiratory  complaints  the  general  

practitioner should make a note of vital signs particularly and, importantly, respiratory 

and heart rates and temperature.  General practitioners should have a low threshold for 

emergency referral or urgent X-ray. 

 
Key Words:  Myocarditis; Misdiagnosis  
 
 
In witness whereof the said Coroner has hereunto set and subscribed his hand and  
 
Seal the 25th day of November, 2016. 
 
 
 

 

 
 
Inquest Number  23/2016 (1146/2013) 

 

State Coroner 

 
 
 

